now are you have you also been
interested in the issue of this is a
strange kind of Science Fiction like
issue i' I've
seen descriptions in
the pop scientific culture online I
suppose of the notion of different
civilizational
types so is that a is that a notion that
you've toyed with to any degree yeah
this is the probably the kardashev
scaling you're thinking of so this is a
Nikolai Kardash
was a Russian Soviet Union physicist I
think in the 60s or ' 70s and he wanted
to try and come up with a way of
classifying different potential
civilizations out there and he argued
that the the most reasonable way to do
this and many people would disagree with
him I think but he argued the most
reasonable way would be energy energy
usage and so he calculated that a type
one civilization as he defined it would
be one that uses all of the irradiation
that hits the planet so you know imagine
you cover the whole earth in solar panel
and they're 100% efficient solar panels
and the energy you collect equals the
energy you use so that would be a type
one civilization now in practice you
couldn't do with solar panels of course
you had nowhere to live so you'd
probably have structures in space to
make this really work but it's the
energy usage which really matters going
to a type two is the energy of a star
and a type three is the energy of an
entire galaxy so there there is interest
I think the reason why we like this is
that if it's purely in terms of energy
we think we have a pretty good grasp on
thermodynamics and we think it's fairly
immutable that any civilization must
operate within the rules of
thermodynamics and so this places some
fairly firm observational limits on how
often this happens if there really were
civilizations out there that were
harvesting all the energy from their
star using it for work so imagine like
your laptop running it produces still
waste heat and if you actually collected
all the waste heat that it it radiates
it'll be equal to the amount of power
that goes in has to be an energy balance
conservation of energy one of the laws
of thermodynamics so we can look at
these uh across the sky and see if there
are stars which are essentially
invisible in visible light because that
all that radiation is being absorbed but
radiating in the kind of waste heat band
passes which would be like infrared heat
signatures and we've been looking for
those actually a few weeks ago there was
a couple of candid seven candidates that
were announced by a group uh they were
scanning the sky looking for objects
which had these anomalous infrar
accesses they're very interesting
however another group soon after showed
that three of these seven candidates
happen to coalign with known radio
sources which they surmised were most
likely background galaxies or for you
know things very far away that were
covered in dust we know that galaxies do
often get covered in dust and that can
produce a similar type of signature to
that which they see and so they argue
that three of the seven are definitely
falce positives and in fact when you run
the numbers it's perfectly possible the
other four are too just it's we haven't
seen the galaxies yet but the the
density of these objects given the
number of stars they looked at looked
consistent with them all being Force
positives so we don't we don't have any
compelling evidence for those objects
but it is nice that it's an
observational test we can do uh one of
my colleagues Jason Wright led a survey
out of Penn State where they surveyed
100,000 nearby galaxies to see if the
entire galaxy had been converted this
way and so this is looking for what we
call the kardashev type 3 civilizations
and they found that basically there was
no strong candidates and so this is you
know really intriguing like we we look
around and we don't see nearby galaxies
after 100 thousand of them do not appear
it's very rare that they appear to have
been converted in this way and similarly
for many stars about 100,000 nearby
stars have been surveyed similar to this
so it's very curious um it means that if
civilizations do develop they probably
don't ever reach this kardashev type two
or type three maybe they go to the
virtual world you know maybe the idea of
just developing uh with physical
structures to add into an item doesn't
make sense and we all you know go into
the metaverse whatever it is and just
decide to live in a virtual world rather
than the physical world yes well it in
some ways that would be a more
straightforward thing to do obviously
because we're already doing that and
it's definitely less resource intense so
yeah so what what got you interested in
in in your line of research and and you
have about a 100 papers so why do you
outline first your the full range of
your research or at least the bulk of
your research so that we can flesh out
all the domains that we might discuss
and then I'd like to know you know what
what it was that sparked your interest
in what you're in what you're sure
pursuing yeah thank you so I I work on
many different things um my main area of
research is exoplanets so these our
planets orbiting of the Stars we've been
talking about thus far and you know
that's that has always been a
fascinating topic to me just because it
was it was fairly new only in the last
30 years have we've been able to make
this reach of being able to actually
detect these things for the first time
however in doing you know for me when
you look for exoplanets certainly when I
started looking for exop planets I would
be immediately interested in the
possibility of life and intelligent life
have we've been talking about and many
of my colleagues would kind of giggle
and laugh about that it still still
carries what we call the giggle Factor
the field of seti search for extral
intelligence SE TI setti and still many
my colleagues kind of dismiss that as
kind of a frivolous activity but for me
it's always been obvious that if we're
going to look for stars which could have
planets and then we're going to look for
planets that could have you know
earthlike conditions then surely the end
point of this entire intellectual
exercise is to ask the question whether
they have life on them I don't
understand what we're doing if we're not
going to eventually shoot at that
question so I was never shy of
addressing that and so a lot of my
research has broadened out into
questions of astrobiology technos
signatures which is kind of a modern
rebranding of seti ways of look for
technology in the universe such as the
Dyson spheres that we've spoken about
and increasingly being interested in
statistics and the application of
Statistics to these types of problems
where as we've already pointed out
you're very data starved we don't have a
catalog of of habitats out there at
least known habitats we don't have a
catalog of civilizations discovered thus
far so we are trying to make inferences
about our uniqueness which to me is one
of the most interesting and fundamental
questions we can ask is how how special
or common are we out there in the
universe and we are trying to make
inferences based off very little data a
parity of data and to me that's always
just been intellectually very
stimulating to try and work on that
Fringe of where you know so little but
there's actually still some information
there there is still something there
there's information about the timing of
when Earth developed uh when life
developed on the earth there's
information about the future of our
planet we know that from the evolution
of the sun there's information about the
fact we don't see Galactic Empires and
so my job is to try to S of piece this
puzzle together and not give necessarily
definitive answer but at least limit the
options down to what is the landscape of
what what's possible okay so you
mentioned that it's been about 30 years
that we've had the technological
capacity to even detect exoplanets and
so do you want to talk a little bit
about what that technology consists of
when we started to discover these
planets and then also how in the world
do you in fact discover them
[Music]